from December 1963 until his death in
1968 Martin Luther King jr. was the
target of an intensive campaign by the
Federal Bureau of Investigation to
neutralize him as an effective civil
rights leader in the words of the man in
charge of the FBI's war against dr. King
quote no holds were barred we have used
similar techniques against Soviet agents
the same methods were brought home
against any organization against which
we were targeted we did not
differentiate this is a rough tough
business and quote the FBI collected
information about dr. King's plans and
activities through an extensive
surveillance program employing nearly
every intelligence gathering technique
at the bureau's disposal wiretaps which
were initially approved by attorney
General Robert F Kennedy were maintained
on dr. King's home telephone from
October 1963 until mid 1965 the SCLC
headquarters telephones were covered by
wiretaps for an even longer period
phones in the homes and offices of some
of dr. King's close advisers were also
wiretapped the FBI has acknowledged 16
occasions on which microphones were
hidden in dr. King's hotel and motel
rooms in an attempt to obtain
information about the private activities
of King and his advisers for use to
completely discredit them FBI informants
in the civil rights movement and reports
from field offices kept the bureau's
headquarters informed of developments in
the Civil Rights field
the FBI's presence was so intrusive that
one major figure in the civil rights
movement testified that his colleagues
referred to themselves as members of the
FBI's golden record club the FBI's
formal program to discredit dr. King
with government officials began with the
distribution of a monograph which the
FBI realized could be regarded as a
personal attack on Martin Luther King
and which was subsequently described
by a Justice Department official as a
personal diatribe a personal attack
without evidentiary support
congressional leaders were warned off
the record about alleged dangers posed
by Reverend King the FBI responded to
dr. King's receipt of the Nobel Peace
Prize by attempting to undermine his
reception by foreign heads of state and
American ambassadors in the countries
that he planned to visit when dr. King
returned to the United States steps were
taken to reduce support for a huge
banquet and a special day that were
being planned in his honor
the FBI's programmed to destroy dr. King
as the leader of the civil rights
movement entailed attempt to discredit
him with churches universities and the
press steps were taken to attempt to
convince the National Council of
Churches the Baptist World Alliance and
leading Protestant ministers to halt
financial support of the Southern
Christian Leadership Conference SCLC and
to persuade them that quote Negro
leaders should completely isolate King
and remove him from the role he is now
occupying in civil rights activities end
quote when the FBI learned that dr. King
intended to visit the Pope an agent was
dispatched to persuade Francis Cardinal
Spellman to warn the Pope about the
likely embarrassment that may result to
the Pope should he grant King an
audience
the FBI sought to influence universities
to withhold honorary degrees from dr.
King attempts were made to friendly news
sources that would print unfavorable
articles the FBI offered to play for
reporters tape recordings allegedly made
from microphone surveillance of dr.
King's hotel rooms
the FBI mailed dr. King a tape recording
made from its microphone coverage
according to the chief of the FBI's
domestic Intelligence Division
the tape was intended to precipitate a
separation between dr. King and his wife
in the belief that the
operation would reduce dr. king's
stature the tape recording was
accompanied by a note which dr. King and
his advisors interpreted as a threat
to release the tape recording unless dr.
King committed suicide the FBI also made
preparations to promote someone quote to
assume the role of leadership of the
Negro people when King has been
completely discredited end quote